Practice exercises
Problem:
Copy the data in the file ‘web-server-access-log.txt.gz’ to the table ‘access_log’ in the PostgreSQL database ‘template1’.

The file is available at the location : https://cf-courses-data.s3.us.cloud-object-storage.appdomain.cloud/IBM-DB0250EN-SkillsNetwork/labs/Bash%20Scripting/ETL%20using%20shell%20scripting/web-server-access-log.txt.gz

The following are the columns and their data types in the file:

a. timestamp - TIMESTAMP

b. latitude - float

c. longitude - float

d. visitorid - char(37)

and two more columns: accessed_from_mobile (boolean) and browser_code (int)

The columns which we need to copy to the table are the first four coumns : timestamp, latitude, longitude and visitorid.

NOTE: The file comes with a header. So use the ‘HEADER’ option in the ‘COPY’ command.

The problem may be solved by completing the following tasks:

Task 1: Start the Postgres server.

Click here for Hint
Use the start_postgres command.

Click here for Solution
If the server is not already started, run the following command:

1
start_postgres
Copied!
Task 2: Create the table.

Create a table named access_log to store the timestamp, latitude, longitude and visitorid.

Click here for Hint
Connect to the database template1 in Postgres and run the ‘CREATE TABLE’ command.

Click here for Solution
Step 1: Connect to the database:

Run the following command at the terminal to connect to Postgres

1
psql --username=postgres --host=localhost
Copied!
Step 2: At the postgres=# prompt, run the following command to connect to the database ‘template1’.

1
\c template1;
Copied!
Step 3: Once you connect to the database, run the command to create the table called ‘access_log’:

1
CREATE TABLE access_log(timestamp TIMESTAMP, latitude float, longitude float, visitor_id char(37));
Copied!
Step 4: Once you receive the confirmation message ‘CREATE TABLE’, quit from psql:

1
\q
Copied!
Task 3. Create a shell script named cp-access-log.sh and add commands to complete the remaining tasks to extract and copy the data to the database.

Create a shell script to add commands to complete the rest of the tasks.

Click here for Hint
Use the File-> New File menu option to create a new file and name it according to specification.
Add appropriate comments to the script.

Click here for Solution
Step 1: On the menu on the lab screen, use File->New File to create a new file.

Step 2: Give the name as cp-access-log.sh and click ‘OK’.

Step 3: State the objective of the script using comments.

Copy and paste the following lines into the newly created file.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
# cp-access-log.sh
# This script downloads the file 'web-server-access-log.txt.gz'
# from "https://cf-courses-data.s3.us.cloud-object-storage.appdomain.cloud/IBM-DB0250EN-SkillsNetwork/labs/Bash%20Scripting/ETL%20using%20shell%20scripting/".
# The script then extracts the .txt file using gunzip.
# The .txt file contains the timestamp, latitude, longitude 
# and visitor id apart from other data.
# Transforms the text delimeter from "#" to "," and saves to a csv file.
# Loads the data from the CSV file into the table 'access_log' in PostgreSQL database.
Copied!
Step 4: Save the file using the File->Save menu option.

Task 4. Download the access log file.

Add the wget command to the script to download the file.

Click here for Hint
Refer to the ‘wget’ command usage

Click here for Solution
Add the following line to the end of the script.

1
2
3
# Download the access log file
wget "https://cf-courses-data.s3.us.cloud-object-storage.appdomain.cloud/IBM-DB0250EN-SkillsNetwork/labs/Bash%20Scripting/ETL%20using%20shell%20scripting/web-server-access-log.txt.gz"
Copied!
Task 5. Unzip the gzip file.

Run the gunzip command to unzip the .gz file and extract the .txt file.

Click here for Hint
Use the gunzip command with the -f option.

Click here for Solution
Copy the following lines to the end of the script.

1
2
# Unzip the file to extract the .txt file.
gunzip -f web-server-access-log.txt.gz
Copied!
The -f option of gunzip is to overwrite the file if it already exists.

Task 6. Extract required fields from the file.

Extract timestamp, latitude, longitude and visitorid which are the first four fields from the file using the cut command.

The columns in the web-server-access-log.txt file is delimited by ‘#’.

Click here for Hint
Refer to the usage of cut command.

Click here for Solution
Step 1: Copy the following lines and add them to the end of the script.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
# Extract phase
echo "Extracting data"
# Extract the columns 1 (timestamp), 2 (latitude), 3 (longitude) and 
# 4 (visitorid)
cut -d"#" -f1-4 web-server-access-log.txt  
Copied!
Step 2: Save the file.

Step 3: Run the script.

1
bash cp-access-log.sh
Copied!
Verify that the output contains all the four fields that we extracted.

Task 7. Redirect the extracted output into a file.

Redirect the extracted data into a file named extracted-data.txt

Click here for Hint
Use ‘>’ for shell command output redirection.

Click here for Solution
Step 1: Replace the cut command at end of the script with the following command.

1
cut -d"#" -f1-4 web-server-access-log.txt > extracted-data.txt
Copied!
Step 2: Save the file.

Step 3: Run the script.

1
bash cp-access-log.sh
Copied!
Step 4: Run the command below to verify that the file extracted-data.txt is created, and has the content.

1
cat extracted-data.txt
Copied!
Task 8. Transform the data into CSV format.

The extracted columns are separated by the original “#” delimiter.

We need to convert this into a “,” delimited file.

Click here for Hint
Use ‘tr’ command for transformation.

Click here for Solution
Step 1: Add the lines below at the end of the script.

1
2
3
4
5
# Transform phase
echo "Transforming data"
# read the extracted data and replace the colons with commas.
tr "#" "," < extracted-data.txt
Copied!
Step 2: Save the file.

Step 3: Run the script.

1
bash cp-access-log.sh
Copied!
Step 4: Verify that the output contains ‘,’ in place of “#”.

Now we need to save the transformed data to a .csv file.

Step 5: Replace the tr command at end of the script with the command below.

1
tr "#" "," < extracted-data.txt > transformed-data.csv
Copied!
Step 6: Save the file.

Step 7: Run the script.

1
bash cp-access-log.sh
Copied!
Step 8: Run the command below to verify that the file ‘transformed-data.csv’ is created, and has the content.

1
cat transformed-data.csv
Copied!
Task 9. Load the data into the table access_log in PostgreSQL

PostgreSQL command to copy data from a CSV file to a table is COPY.

The basic structure of the command is,

1
COPY table_name FROM 'filename' DELIMITERS 'delimiter_character' FORMAT;
Copied!
The file comes with a header. So use the ‘HEADER’ option in the ‘COPY’ command.

Invoke this command from the shellscript, by sending it as input to ‘psql’ filter command.

Click here for Hint
To load data from a shell script, send the database commands through a command pipeline to psql command with the help of echo command.

E.g.: echo ‘psql commands‘ | psql

Click here for Solution
Step 1: Add the copy command

Add the lines below to the end of the script ‘cp-access-log.sh’.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
# Load phase
echo "Loading data"
# Send the instructions to connect to 'template1' and
# copy the file to the table 'access_log' through command pipeline.
echo "\c template1;\COPY access_log  FROM '/home/project/transformed-data.csv' DELIMITERS ',' CSV HEADER;" | psql --username=postgres --host=localhost
Copied!
Step 2: Save the file.

Task 10. Execute the final script.

Run the final script.

Click here for Solution
Run the following command at the terminal:

1
bash cp-access-log.sh
Copied!
The bash script can be downloaded from here

Task 11. Verify by querying the database.

Click here for Hint
Run the ‘select’ statement through ‘psql’ with the help of command pipeline.

Click here for Solution
Run the command below at the shell prompt to verify that the table accesss_log is populated with the data.

1
echo '\c template1; \\SELECT * from access_log;' | psql --username=postgres --host=localhost
Copied!
You should see the records displayed on screen.

Authors
Ramesh Sannareddy

Other Contributors
Rav Ahuja

Change Log
Date (YYYY-MM-DD)	Version	Changed By	Change Description
2022-07-27	0.3	Lakshmi Holla	Updated Linux command
2021-09-06	0.2	Ramesh Sannareddy	Incorporated the beta feedback.
2021-06-07	0.1	Ramesh Sannareddy	Created initial version of the lab
Copyright (c) 2021 IBM Corporation. All rights reserved.

Previous